INT: Today's date is
January 25th, 1996.
The survivor is Celina
Biniaz, maiden named Karp.
The interviewer
is Carol Stulberg.
We are in Camarillo,
California in the United
States of America.
The language will be English.
I'm Carol Stulberg,
S-T-U-L-B-E-R-G.
And I have the privilege
of interviewing Mrs.
Celina Biniaz on January the
25th, 1996, in Camarillo,
California, in the
United States of America.
This is January the 25th, 1996.
We're in Camarillo, California
with Mrs. Celina Biniaz.
Mrs. Biniaz, can you please
spell your name for us?
CB: Well, the first
name is C-E-L-I-N-A.
My last name is B like
in boy, I-N-I-A-Z.
INT: And what was
your name at birth?
CB: Karp, Celina Karp, K-A-R-P.
INT: And where were you born?
CB: I was born in
Krakow, Poland.
INT: And when were you born?
CB: On the 28th of May, 1931.
INT: So how old are you today?
CB: 64.
INT: What were the
names of your parents?
CB: In Poland, it was Ignatzi
Karp and Felicia Karp.
INT: And did you have
any brothers or sisters?
CB: No, I did not.
I was an only child.
INT: What was your
father's occupation?
CB: My father was an accountant.
INT: Did your
mother work as well?
CB: She was also an accountant.
INT: Tell us, please, what your
earliest memories of childhood
in Krakow were like.
CB: I had a very
nice, happy childhood.
Lived sort of a middle
class existence.
My parents both
worked-- my mother
was a professional person,
so we had a governess who
took care of me.
It was important to be--
to behave in a certain way.
I was always very well
dressed, always wore
white gloves, even to play
in the sandbox in the park.
Life was kind of
nice till the war.
INT: When you were
a child, did you
have extended family members
living around you-- uncles
or aunts or grandparents?
CB: Only an aunt.
My mother's younger
sister lived with us.
She was an artist.
She painted-- did lots of
interesting embroidery.
INT: What was her name?
CB: Gucia.
INT: Her last name?
CB: Wittenburg.
It was my mother's middle
name-- maiden name.
INT: What was your
religious background like?
CB: I would say that
it would compare
to the conservative Judaism
in the United States.
We weren't really
orthodox, that orthodox.
But then, I think,
in Poland, there
were no divisions in Judaism.
There was just one religion.
INT: Did you live in a Jewish
neighborhood, or was it mixed?
CB: It was very mixed.
I would say it was
predominantly non-Jewish.
You know, there were some
Jewish families in the building,
but I would say that, if I
had to give it a percentage,
I would say 75% non-Jewish,
maybe 25% Jewish.
INT: Did you have friends
that were non-Jewish as well
as Jewish?
CB: Yes, of course.
I went to a public school.
And in the public school,
we were all mixed.
INT: What do you remember
about public school?
CB: Well, I only
went to two grades.
So what I remember is mostly
first grade and second grade.
I remember my first
grade teacher's name.
And it was Mrs. Jablonska,
which meant apple.
INT: What do you
remember about school?
CB: I enjoyed it tremendously.
I loved learning.
I remember saying to my mother,
I will never learn how to read.
But I did.
And I-- I did enjoy
reading tremendously.
In Poland, the
libraries were not free,
and you had to pay for
checking out books.
And we used to do
this continually.
I enjoyed that very much.
INT: Did you also have books
and magazines or newspapers
at home?
CB: I had a lot of books.
That was my favorite gift.
And everybody knew that I
enjoyed getting books as gifts.
INT: What books do you
remember reading as a child?
CB: Oh, I remember
Heidi by Johanna Spyri.
And I think that stands
out very much in my mind,
because I kind of
wished I had been Heidi
and had that experience.
I remember reading
James Fenimore Cooper,
you know, The Last
of the Mohicans.
I couldn't imagine what it was
like to be a Native American,
or an Indian in those days.
Adventures, Western stories,
and things like that.
INT: Did you ever experience
any anti-Semitism?
Do you remember anything
about anti-Semitism?
CB: Well, I remember
particularly,
at the beginning-- you
know, just prior to the war,
and at the beginning
of the war, there
was a heightened feeling of
something is going to happen.
And people used to congregate in
the courtyard of the apartment
building and talk
about war, and feeling
that if something-- if
things were going to happen,
things weren't going to
be so good for the Jews.
But as a child, no.
I don't think that I
felt any anti-Semitism.
I really wouldn't have
known what that was.
INT: Do you remember
your parents
speaking about imminent war?
CB: I remember everybody
talking, congregating,
and-- and speaking about it.
And there was a feeling
of not understanding
what was happening, but feeling
that something was ominous,
because everybody was concerned.
You know, the older people
were concerned and talked
in hushed tones, and listened
to the foreign broadcasts
on the Telefunken radio--
on the shortwave.
INT: What do you
remember thinking
about that when you heard it?
CB: Oh, I-- it just--
a fear.
I think it was just
a general fear,
and is-- was our
life going to change?
That sort of thing.
And-- and a feeling of--
we couldn't do certain things.
And then when war broke
out, of course, right away,
the schools were closed, and
so our lives really changed.
INT: Well, what do
you remember as being
the first signs of trouble
that influenced you as a child?
CB: Well, I think as soon
as-- as soon as war broke out,
you know, and we heard--
well, bombs started falling--
there were like three,
I think, fell in Krakow
on the radio station.
I had just received,
just prior to that,
a puppy, which was wonderful.
My-- my aunt bought it for me.
It was a little
spitz, white spitz.
And one of the
first things that I
had to part with,
painfully, was to give up
my dog to a shelter, because
my parents felt that,
couldn't take care of it
with the war approaching.
And I distinctly remember
having to take him to a shelter.
And that was painful,
because I didn't
understand why, you know--
I was only about eight
years old at the time.
INT: So in September of 1939,
when the war started in Poland,
what do you remember exactly?
CB: I remember people panicking.
There was a general fear.
I remember that the
neighbors that discussed
the impending problems
in the courtyard
on the 2nd of September--
I mean, war started
on the 1st September--
on the 2nd of September,
appeared with armbands sporting
swastikas.
They turned out to have
been fifth columnists.
So it was really kind
of an incredible feeling
to realize that you've
been trusting people and--
an telling them your
feelings and your attitudes,
and they were
sympathizers of the Nazis,
or of the Germans at
the time, you know.
I don't think we really
fully realized what Nazism
was till it hit us later.
At that time, we just talked
about Germany invading Poland.
INT: Well, how did your life
change when the war started?
CB: Well, as I say, I
lost my dog right away.
School closed, so we were
not allowed to go to school.
We were sent-- for
a very short time,
some of the Jewish families
organized a Jewish school,
and we were sent
there for a few--
just a few weeks, really.
And my father, of
course, left right away.
I mean, all the men, as
soon as war broke out,
all the men went east, you
know, on a long march, running--
sort of running away.
So we were just left--
all the women were left
in-- in the building.
Then my father came
back, fortunately.
But there was this
incredible fear, you know,
not knowing what was
happening to my father.
And I could sense
that, I could feel it,
I could see it in my mother.
That was the beginning of it.
It was just kind of a
totally unsettled life.
And by the time the winter
came, my father was back--
after a long walk,
you know, back.
Then when the winter came,
right away, we were told to,
you know, we were told to
go out and shovel snow,
and do all kinds of menial
tasks for the Germans.
Life changed
completely, right away.
My parents-- we knew that
we were going to be-- there
were rumors that we were going
to be resettled into a ghetto.
So my parents got rid of their
nice furniture and silver
and china and all
of these things,
sold them to the various
non-Jewish neighbors.
And I think that-- my mother--
I think it hurt my
mother terribly,
because she liked those things.
She was proud of them.
They were her trousseau.
It had taken them a while
to accumulate these things,
you know.
And it just-- life just
changed, completely, you know.
You lost your sense--
not that you ever had a
tremendous sense of security,
but as a child, I did.
And at that point, I no longer
had that sense of security.
It was totally replaced by the
beginnings of fear, you know.
INT: So what happened when you
were told to leave your homes?
CB: I remember my--
my father worked for a--
he was an accountant in a
shirt factory named HoGo.
I think, the initials stood
for Horowitz and Goldfarb,
or something like that.
But it was sort of
analogous to Arrow
factory, Arrow Shirt,
a Manhattan, here.
And he got one of
the maintenance
men there to come
with a push cart--
you know that they used to
carry the shirts from one
place to another.
And we loaded up some of
our personal belongings,
and we moved--
I mean, we didn't--
a few sticks of furniture,
like mattresses and beds.
And we moved.
INT: What did you take with you?
Do you remember?
CB: Books, probably.
And maybe some dolls.
I was very fond of dolls.
INT: Where did you move to?
CB: We moved to--
well, they moved us--
the ghetto then became--
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]
they moved us into what
used to be the Jewish
section of town.
And then, actually,
they moved us twice.
You know, the ghetto
kept shrinking.
So at first, it was much larger,
and then it shrank some more
and shrank some more.
And then they started
breaking us up.
You know, they--
at first, we didn't
have any walls
around the ghetto,
but then they started putting
up a wall around the ghetto,
and they even bricked
in windows and doors,
you know, of buildings
facing towards the outside
of the ghetto.
We, at first, lived in one
of those buildings that
faced to the outside
of the ghetto--
so we could see some of
the trees and things.
But then they moved
us out of that house,
because that house
then became part
of the outside of the
ghetto, into more inner--
say, I think we moved
twice, two or three
times within the ghetto--
each time to a
smaller accommodation.
Each time to share
with more people.
In other words, you
would have one room,
and there would be another
family in another room,
and everybody would be sharing
the kitchen and the hallway
and the bathrooms.
Life just became totally
different, you know.
INT: What about food and money?
How did you come about that?
CB: Well, we still had--
well, right away,
as I remember, they
closed all the bank
accounts, you know,
Jewish bank accounts
were closed.
So my parents couldn't
withdraw any money.
But I'm sure that knowing
the war was coming,
I think everybody sort of put
some money away, and some.
And I think they sold
a few valuables things.
I mean, they got some money
for the furniture, and--
I assume.
You know, I mean, I didn't
question them at the time.
But now in retrospect,
I would imagine
that that's where
the money came from
and that that's how we
paid for food, you know?
I mean-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]
Jews tend to be survivors.
INT: What else do you
remember about the ghetto?
CB: Well, I remember-- you
know, as a child in the ghetto,
at first, it was not--
for a child, we were
then squished together
in a tight place, but there
were lots of other children.
So in a sense, there
was more time to play.
We didn't have school, so
there was more time to play,
more time to visit
with other people.
At first, it wasn't
so bad, you know?
I mean, for a child.
For the grown ups, it
must have been terrible.
You know, when I think about
it, now that I'm a parent,
it must have been hard.
INT: Did your parents
work at that time?
CB: Yes, they did.
They continued working.
Both my mother then,
at that point, joined--
the HoGo factory was taken over,
was given to a person named
Madritsch.
And it became slowly
turned from making shirts
into making army uniforms
for the Wehrmacht.
It's sort of a parallel
to Schindler making--
you know, enameled
pots and pans,
then becoming--
making mess kits.
Madritsch then took over, and
then my mother and my father
both worked for
Madritsch in the--
in the office.
My father ran the factory,
because he sort of knew it--
he was, you know, in
terms of accounting
and being able to predict how to
make money out of it, I guess.
And my mother
worked in the office
taking care of the books.
INT: What did you do during the
day while they were at work?
CB: Just sort of
hung around, really.
I was all alone, really.
They left the ghetto to go to
work, and I was left behind.
Which, I'm sure, must have been
very difficult for my parents.
And then, as things progressed
and got worse and worse
in the ghetto--
as they, you know,
made the ghetto smaller
by transporting people out
of the ghetto,
and at that point,
we didn't know where they
were transporting them,
you know, except someplace.
As the ghetto got
smaller and smaller,
it became evident that--
at least for my parents--
that the best thing would be for
me to go out with them to work.
So they were able to,
through knowing somebody,
to get a blue card for
me, which was a permit--
a work permit, really,
to go out of the ghetto.
For a while there, I
worked in the ghetto.
I worked at a paper cooperative.
They only employed
children, really--
licking envelopes,
making envelopes.
I also worked at a
brush co-operative
making brushes, sticking, you
know, the bristles into a brush
and pulling it with a wire.
But that was not very
long that I remember.
My parents were able to get--
to fake my age, make
it two years older,
to allow me to go out
of the ghetto with them.
And got the blue card
for me, and then I
joined them going to
Madritsch out of the ghetto.
And I was-- then started
working on a sewing machine.
INT: What exactly did you do?
CB: Sewed uniforms,
exactly sewed uniforms.
You know what piece work is?
That's what I did.
You know, everybody gets
either a piece of a sleeve
or a piece of a pocket,
and-- and you work on it.
INT: And how old were
you at this time?
CB: Well, let me see.
I must have been nine--
nine or 10, and they
made me two years older.
So it would have been, you know,
according to the records, 12.
INT: But how old were
you really at that time?
CB: Between nine and 10.
INT: And what year was that?
CB: Must have been 1940 or '41,
someplace in between there.
Probably right about
there, you know.
I'm not exact on the figures,
because I don't really
remember the exact times
that the ghetto got
smaller and smaller, except
that I think in 1943,
it closed completely, and
we were transported to--
that was the last selection.
We were transported to Plaszow,
which became a labor camp.
At first, it was a labor camp.
Then it became a
concentration camp.
INT: So when you say it
was the last selection,
what do you mean by that?
CB: What I mean by that is
that, one day they came in,
and I think--
I think this is what is shown so
very well in Schindler's List,
because--
except that I don't think--
rightly so, it was not shown
in its complete horror.
Because what really happened
is that the German--
well, I don't know
whether they were
SS or soldiers or whoever--
took some of the children and
absolutely knocked their heads
on the walls.
They swung them by the legs
and killed them that way.
It was a horrible experience.
INT: Did you witness this?
CB: I saw it, yes.
We all saw it, you know.
INT: What did you think
as a child at that time?
CB: I was afraid.
I mean, what did I think?
The overwhelming emotion that
has probably ruled my life
has been fear-- fear of
authority and fear in general.
[BACKGROUND NOISE]
INT: Let's wait a second until
this helicopter goes away.
CB: OK.
It doesn't want to.
[BACKGROUND NOISE]
INT: Let's stop for a minute.
OK, now the helicopter
is gone and we
can go back to what you were
saying about your feelings
at that time.
CB: As I said, you know,
the overwhelming emotion
that I remember was fear.
You know-- not so much anger,
but kind of a questioning,
how could anybody do
anything like that?
I think it was at
the age of 12 that I
know that I lost my faith in
God, because I knew that no--
I mean, the Jews believed that
God-- at least the explanation
was-- that the
reason things were
happening to the Jews because
of the sins of our forefathers.
And I simply couldn't
believe that any god would
allow a child to be killed.
So I had-- I had
my doubts about it,
and I have not really
resolved them since.
INT: So after this
incident with the Germans
killing all these children--
CB: Babies.
INT: --what happened
to you next?
CB: Well, we-- we went--
we were transported out of
the ghetto and into Plaszow.
INT: How did you get there?
CB: I believe they
took us by trucks--
or we walked.
I can't even remember.
We might have walked
directly from the factory.
I'm not sure.
Of course, at that point,
everything was left behind.
The only thing that we had on
were the clothes on our backs,
you know.
So no possessions at all.
We, you know, we lived in
barracks, five to a berth.
That was it.
But for a while
there, you know, we
were able to walk out of the
Plaszow camp and walk about--
I think the trip took about
90 minutes each way to our--
to the factory, to
Madritsch factory.
The factory was
moved really from--
the factory had been
moved originally,
I think, from middle
of Krakow to Podgorze,
which is kind of a little
suburb over the bridge, of the--
Vistula bridge.
And Madritsch established
a factory there.
And we walked from Plaszow
to this factory every day,
and walked back.
We were not as fortunate
as the Schindler
people, who were able to
stay and live at the factory.
We had to live in the barracks.
You know that Plaszow, the
camp, was made originally
on the Jewish cemetery.
So they crushed the stones.
So we walked every day over
people's names, you know.
So that was kind of
humiliating, too--
especially to
people who had, you
know, relatives buried
at that cemetery.
That was the largest
Jewish cemetery in Krakow.
INT: What else do you
remember about Plaszow?
What were the living
conditions like there?
CB: They were pretty primitive.
I mean, all we had
were the barracks.
And you know, Poland gets
very, very cold in the winter,
so we shivered.
We were expected-- every
morning, early in the morning,
we were called to
the appelplatz, which
was a counting place where they,
you know, lined us up in fives
and counted us.
And we stood there
for a long time,
and-- you know, if the
count did not jive,
you had to wait until it
jived before they would
excuse us to go to our work.
From the time-- from the time
we started going from the ghetto
to the--
to the factory, we
always walked in fives.
And that sort of became--
after the war, it was very
difficult to walk alone.
[LAUGHS] You always looked
on either side of you
to see whether you had
your teammates with you,
or your people from your five.
But for me, that was very
good, because I was a child.
And though I was tall,
by being able to walk
amongst other five, I
was not as prominent.
So that's-- you know-- that
was a security measure for me.
INT: Were there other
children with you at Plaszow?
CB: At the time, yes, there
were quite a few children still,
you know, in Plaszow.
As long as it was a labor camp.
But the one day, they had
a selection in Plaszow,
and they took a lot
of the children away.
And some of the children hid
themselves in the latrines.
You know, that's
how they survived.
I remember, we smuggled a couple
children out in our fives,
you know, in sacks between
us, out of the camp.
And then, once the camp
became a concentration camp,
we no longer could go out.
And so Madritsch established
his factory in the camp,
in some barracks, away
from the living quarters.
At that point, of
course, in Plaszow
already, one other thing that
happened when the ghetto closed
is that my father,
of course, then
became part of the men's
section, and my mother
and I became part of
the women's section.
And we weren't reunited again
until after the war, you know.
Except at work, we saw
each other at work.
But in terms of living
areas, the men were the men,
and the women were the women.
INT: Did you have any
outstanding memories
that you'd like to share
with us about any experiences
at Plaszow that happened to you?
CB: Well, I witnessed a
couple hangings of young boys.
He happened to have sung
a song or something,
and they, you know,
they hung him for that.
I witnessed the killing--
Goeth shooting somebody
right in front of-- you
know, I mean, I was in
the barrack looking out,
and I saw him.
He came-- he was a relative
of [? Hilowitz, ?] who was
probably the most
prominent kapo--
Jewish policeman in the camp.
And he came and shot this guy.
And the woman-- his wife
ran out of the barrack
to see what was happening,
and he shot her, too.
INT: Who did the shooting?
CB: Goeth did.
INT: Amon Goeth?
CB: Amon Goeth, yes.
INT: The commandant of the camp.
CB: The commandant.
So that's one outstanding
memory that I have.
Having to watch somebody being--
the hanging was terrible.
Being made to watch
beatings of women,
you know, that was horrible.
And always being afraid
that we might be singled out
for something like that, too.
The fear-- the fear
was just incredible.
INT: I'm going to
stop you right there.
We're going to change
the tape, and we'll
start off with a new tape in.
INT: 25th, 1996, in
Camarillo, California.
Mrs. Biniaz, you were telling
us about your constant fear
at Plaszow, and your
experiences with Amon
Goeth, the commandant.
Did you see him often there?
CB: Quite often.
You know, he took great
pleasure frightening people,
so he would enjoy walking
through the camp with his two
huge Great Danes, and he--
he got enormous pleasure out
of putting fear into people.
There was just-- he
was a very evil man.
I also distinctly
remember one day,
he came to Madritsch, spoke to
my father, and all of a sudden
we saw my father walking
with him down the road.
Well, it was incredible
fear, because we
didn't know that my father
was going to return, you know?
But he did-- he did come back.
I don't know what
it was all about.
But you see, Goeth was--
Madritsch was
friendly with Goeth,
just as Schindler was
in a sense that
they were supplying
Goeth with all kinds
of goodies, you know.
That's how, you know,
the bribery worked.
And so we had a certain
amount of protection,
as long as we worked
for Madritsch.
Madritsch was a
wonderful person--
he and his companion,
Mr. Titsch.
They were really classy--
two people who somehow
just got caught.
You know, there were a lot
of Germans and Austrians
who were caught
in the situation,
not of their doing, really, and
they did the best they could.
They did bring in food for us.
Madritsch brought in loads of--
loaves of bread for the
people-- for his workers--
and medications.
They were very decent people.
INT: So how long
did you actually
work at the Madritsch factory?
CB: I worked at the
Madritsch factory
till the concentration
camp closed--
which was, I believe--
now I have a hard
time remembering
whether it was September that
the camp actually closed,
and we were all
shipped to Auschwitz.
Well, It was at that time that
Schindler came to Madritsch
and made him a proposition,
and said, you know,
I'm taking my people
to Czechoslovakia.
Why don't you reestablish a
factory in Czechoslovakia?
And Madritsch said he
didn't want to-- he had
had enough of the whole thing.
But Schindler said
to him, well then,
I'm making a list of people
that I'm taking with me.
And I am-- because
we're friends,
I want you to give me some
names from your people.
And that's how we
got on the list--
on Schindler's list, and
that's how we survived.
It was really
thanks to Madritsch,
who was grateful,
really, to my parents
for having worked so
well for him, you know,
that he put us on the list.
He put on quite a few people
from the factory on the list.
And that's how we got on.
INT: Do you remember
Madritsch's first name?
CB: I'm trying to think
of his first name.
I know that Titsch's
first name was Raymond.
Madritsch's first name?
I may think of it, I don't know.
INT: So when they closed
the concentration camp,
how did you find out you
were going to Auschwitz?
Or did you find out you
CB: We found out when we
ended up in Auschwitz.
We were put on a train--
we thought we were--
the men were shipped
earlier, and we--
the women were then
shipped in the cattle cars.
And it took quite a few days--
it took some time.
We didn't really realize
that we were getting--
going to Auschwitz
till we arrived there
in the middle of the night,
and they emptied out the cars,
and we saw where we were.
And it was a very
frightening experience.
INT: While you were in the
cars those three days--
the cattle cars-- what
was that like for you?
CB: Well, it was hard.
You know, it was-- we
were all cramped together.
We had no water,
no food, nothing.
But I think-- and the fear
of not knowing where we were
going-- you know,
really, I mean,
we didn't-- we were being--
the reason it took so long--
I mean, Krakow and
Auschwitz are very close.
It's only like 35 miles, or
no more than 50 miles away.
But because the Russians
were approaching,
there were many trains
being shunted over
to different sidelines--
styled rails, you know.
That's why it took--
it didn't take three days.
It just took a day
and a half, I think.
It took us three and a half
days to go from Auschwitz
to Czechoslovakia.
That was the long trip.
But we ended up in Auschwitz
in the middle of the night,
and that was a
horrible experience.
INT: Describe what you remember.
CB: Fear, smell, burning
flesh, shouting, orders,
not knowing which way
to-- music being played.
Slush, on-- you know-- on--
the mud on the-- on the road.
You know, the Germans barking at
us-- get out, get out, get out,
you know, from the cattle cars.
Finding ourselves on this--
and realizing where we were.
And you know, the fear that
that was the end, you know?
INT: Were you with your
mother at this time?
CB: All the time.
I was with my
mother all the time.
And of course, the first
place they took us to,
they walked us into the
sauna, which is the--
supposedly the delousing
room, or whatever.
But we, at that
point, already had
heard what happened
in Auschwitz,
so when they told us to strip
and take our clothes off,
and they shaved our
heads and all that,
and they shoved us into the--
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]
the shower room, you know,
we didn't know what
to expect, you know?
Whether we were going
to have the gas,
or whether we were going
to have actual water.
It was a horrible
experience, you know?
When the water finally
came, it was just like--
we couldn't believe
it, you know.
INT: And what
happened after that?
CB: Well, they gave us clothes.
I mean, they took
our clothes away
and they gave us their clothes,
so we no longer had anything
of our own anymore,
at all, you know.
And then they took
us to the barracks.
INT: What were
the barracks like?
CB: Cold.
Very cold.
I mean, Poland gets very cold
starting from October on,
you know?
It was very cold.
And the thing that-- you know,
and they kept pulling us out
of the barracks every--
and make us stand in
front, and count us
and count us, again in fives.
So we would switch places, you
know, so the person in front
and the person in the back
wouldn't get so cold, you know.
We would take turns.
And of course, food
was very limited.
So we were hungry, very hungry.
INT: What was the food like?
CB: Just a pot of watery soup
and a little piece of bread.
That was it.
And the most important thing
was to keep yourself clean,
because the slightest pimple
on your body, or anything,
would right away make
you go to the wrong side.
Yeah.
INT: What did you do
there during the day?
CB: Nothing.
Literally nothing.
There was nothing to do, except
stand on-- you know, I mean,
they kept us for hours
outside, counting us.
But there was-- you
know, there was no work.
We were waiting.
We were in transition,
supposedly.
At least we found out that
we were in transition.
We couldn't figure
out how we got there.
We were supposed
to have gotten--
you know, we were
signed on a list,
we were supposed to go
to Brünnlitz to work.
So we were just waiting.
We didn't know
what was happening.
That was another
thing, you know, not
knowing, one way or the other.
INT: Are there any
specific incidences
that you remember from
Auschwitz that you'd
like to share with us?
CB: Well, one
specific incident is
that I owe my life to Dr.
Mengele's change of heart,
you know.
There was one day that they
had took us through a selection
again, and it was the only
time that my mother and I
were separated.
She had gone to--
on the ruse of peeling
potatoes or something,
which she thought she could
bring some potato skins back
to--
to eat.
Turned out, it wasn't that.
I think they were
supposed to give
blood or something like that.
But anyway, they took
some of the women--
35 or 40 women--
to do work or something.
But the rest of the barrack
was taken to-- for a selection.
Again, we were told to
strip and walk through.
And on the first run
through, Dr. Mengele
pushed me to the left side
with some of the older women.
And then, I don't
know what happened.
He had a change of
heart, and told everybody
to go through again.
And when we went
through again, I just--
I don't know how I got the
nerve, but I looked up at him
and I said three
words in German--
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
and he let me go.
He let me go to the right.
And I ran like crazy, clutching
my clothes in my hands,
in the nude, out.
INT: How old were
you at that time?
CB: Well, I must have been 12.
12 and a half, almost 13.
Real age-- according to the
upped age, I was probably,
what, two years older?
So I would have been almost 14.
INT: What do you remember
about Dr. Mengele that
stands out in your mind?
CB: He was a devil.
That's what I-- a handsome--
he was not a bad-looking
guy, you know?
But what I remember-- he
had a pencil in his hand,
and that's all he did was
point with his pencil.
That was Dr. Mengele.
That was my one brief
encounter, but I came out
of it OK, you know?
So I was lucky.
INT: So when your
mother returned--
CB: My mother
returned and found out
that the barrack had
been taken for selection,
and she was frantic--
absolutely frantic.
I remember having run
out from the selection,
and my mother returning
and running up and down
looking for me.
I mean, she was absolutely
frantic, you know?
I can imagine, you know,
what it would be like.
INT: So how long were you
at Auschwitz, altogether?
CB: Oh, I'm trying to remember
when he got us, finally.
Schindler actually
came-- and now, see,
that's another thing--
I really didn't know
that, that he actually
came for us, till
I found out later
that he-- it was only
through his interference
that we finally
got out, you know.
Because all of us-- we
were lined up to go.
They lined us up
again, and told us
they were going to tattoo
us-- tattoo our number on us.
And I was even asking my
mother, is it going to hurt?
Is it going to hurt?
And then, all of a sudden,
they shoved us into the cars,
and we went off
without the tattoos.
We couldn't-- you know,
everything was just--
everything happened, and
you didn't understand why.
We were there, definitely,
through a lot of snow and cold.
So I would have to say we were
there through November and part
of December.
I would think so, you know.
And then it took us about
three and a half days
to make the trip
from Auschwitz to--
my mother got very sick.
She had pneumonia.
She really got very, very sick.
When we got to--
to Brünnlitz, you
know, they came to--
Schindler came to the-- to
the station to pick us up--
you know, to the
railroad station--
we couldn't believe that
we actually made it.
INT: What do you remember--
CB: Well, we saw the men
behind the wire, you know?
And we couldn't believe-- and
they couldn't recognize us,
because we were all shaved.
They left us with hair,
and got all their women
without any hair, you know?
So, the barracks--
I remember that we slept
on top of the factory,
and it was warm.
I remember that.
We felt good and warm.
But he hadn't had the time,
yet, to build any bunks,
so we all slept on the floor.
It was only later that he--
that they built bunks for us.
And in this particular place,
we shared two to a bunk--
so that was kind of
nice to not to have
to share with five people.
They were triple bunks,
you know-- three tiers.
But the distinct memory
is that it was warm.
Again, he got us some
soup and some coffee,
and we each got a round
little bowl and a pot-- which
my mother still
has to this day--
red enamelled pot,
enamelled pan.
The pan was for soup,
the pot was for coffee--
which, you could call it coffee.
I mean, it was just
water, really--
and a piece of bread.
But one of the
problems-- you know,
we felt safe with Schindler,
but one of the problems
was that there was
really no food.
At that point, this was
towards the end of the war,
and supplies were
very hard to come by.
People-- there were quite a
few sick people at that point.
The trip was very hard.
In the cold cattle cars,
a lot of people got sick.
It was a problem, you know?
INT: What happened with
your mother's pneumonia?
My mother, she was
absolutely remarkable.
She was very, very sick, and
there were no medications,
you know.
She got finished
with the pneumonia,
but she had kidney
problems after that.
She was very swollen
towards the end of the--
ot the camp, you know.
We all were kind of sick.
In Plaszow, I had
had my experiences.
I had-- I forgot to say that--
I had contracted scarlet
fever, and ended up
at the epidemical
hospital, where--
which was kind of
dangerous at the time,
you know, to be sick at all.
But at the hospital,
unfortunately,
as I got over the
scarlet fever, I
caught typhoid
fever, because there
were no sanitary conditions.
And I got over
the typhoid fever,
but that left me with jaundice.
I was kind of yellow
for a long time.
And that left me with
a liver impairment,
which then flared
up in Brünnlitz.
And I ended up in the infirmary
with kind of an enlarged liver.
And it was only through the
good graces of Mrs. Schindler--
Emily-- who every day came with
a pot of farina that she had
cooked herself, you
know, and fed us--
fed us sick people, that
we survived, really.
Because that was the only
nourishment that we got.
So that was the story.
I worked there, too.
I mean, we all worked on
the-- on the machinery.
INT: What did you
do on the machinery?
CB: Well, to start with,
another girl and I--
we were the youngest there.
According to Schindler,
we had the small hands
that were able to fit
into the large machinery
and clean the large
machinery from inside out.
And that's what
we started doing.
We cleaned the large
machinery, you know.
And then I worked on
a lathe, and then I
worked on a calibrating
machine for a while.
An interesting
thing is, there was
a row of us on the
calibrating machine,
you know, sitting there
and measuring the items
as they came off the
assembly line, to make sure
that they were correct.
And they weren't, of course,
but that was the idea.
I mean, Schindler didn't
want us to produce anything
that was-- that would work.
INT: Did he tell you that?
CB: Yes, he did tell us that.
I mean, he told the
supervisors that, you know.
And the calibrating machines
were fixed in such a way
that if somebody checked
it, it would show right.
But it wasn't right.
But the interesting thing
is, as we sat on the line,
the-- you know, with
the calibrating--
everybody talked about food.
And they talked about
the elegant dinners
and elegant desserts that
they would prepare and cook.
I mean, it was
incredible, the way
they talked about,
you know, fancy meals.
As if that gave--
you konw, that's all they
talked about was food.
Because we were so hungry.
I think that was
the reason for it.
INT: While you were
working at Brünnlitz,
did you see a lot
of Schindler there?
CB: Yes, he used to come on
the factory floor quite often.
As a matter of fact, one day
he was visited by Mr. Titsch
from Madritsch factory,
who came to visit.
And they came by, as I was
cleaning one of the machines,
and they stopped by, and
Mr. Titsch spoke to me
and asked me, you
know, how things were,
and if there was anything
that I would want.
And at the time, I was
wearing still the clogs--
the wooden clogs--
and it was winter.
And I said to Mr. Titsch, ah,
if only we could have shoes.
About a week and a
half later, a load of--
well, now, they weren't shoes,
but they had-- you know,
they were wooden soles, but
at least they had some sort
of a canvas tops--
was delivered for the women.
Now, I don't know
whether Mr. Titsch did it
or whether Schindler did it,
but Schindler was with him,
you know.
It was nice to have
gotten some shoes.
And then another time,
Goeth came to visit.
INT: What do you
remember about that?
CB: I remember we were
lined up to greet him,
and Schindler walked
through with Goeth.
And of course, in Plaszow, you
didn't dare lift your eyelids
to look at Goeth.
I mean, your head
was always down.
Well, we felt so
protected by Schindler
that we looked at him.
For the first time, really
looked in the guy's face.
And it was just-- it was
a good feeling, you know,
to be able to look the
monster in his face.
It was even better
later on in Poland,
when we returned to
Poland after the war,
to find out that he had
been caught, judged guilty,
and was facing hanging.
Just what he meted
out to other people.
INT: So what do you remember
about the end of your stay
at Brünnlitz?
How did things change?
Were your SS guards
still around?
What happened?
CB: Well, the SS-- it was
interesting, because the war--
we heard-- we had underground
radio that we listened to,
so we knew that the war
was over on the 7th of May.
But-- and of course,
Schindler left under the--
with some of the people
who escorted him out of--
into the American zone.
However, we were waiting for
the Russians to liberate us.
We were surrounded
by the black shirts.
There were huge groups of them
still in the surrounding woods
of Czechoslovakia--
or at that area, anyway.
The SS-- from what
we understand--
from what I remember,
what I understood--
that the two grave--
even though we were under
the protection of Schindler,
there was a commandant that
was in charge of the camp,
of the labor camp.
I mean, Schindler only used
the labor force in his factory.
The commandant was supposedly
in charge of the prisoners.
Supposedly, there were two
huge graves dug already for us.
Now, I don't know whether
that is true or not,
that's what I heard.
Schindler-- we also
heard that Schindler
got the guards
drunk in some way,
and sent them off
on a train, away.
One guard-- and he gave
the Jewish policemen
guns to protect us
while he went away.
And so, for two days,
we had protection
from Jewish prisoners
holding rifles
against any marauders that
might be on the outside.
We understood there
was one terrible guy,
and somehow they caught him
in some way and kept him.
Because I know that, when
the Russians liberated us,
they hanged him, and they wanted
us all to watch the hanging.
INT: Was this a
German that was hung?
CB: Yeah.
INT: Who did the hanging?
CB: The Russians.
The Russian army was a
very interesting army
when they came in, unlike an
army that you think marches
to a-- to a goose-stepping
beat, you know.
They were very incredible.
There were women, and
young boys, and older men.
It was just--
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]
they weren't in
ranks of any sort,
they just came, you
know, with one of them
on a horse to start with,
to tell us that we were free
and to tell us to
leave the camp.
Well, we were afraid.
We did not know how to
walk outside of the camp
without walking in
fives, you know.
But after a while, you
know, in a few days,
we started back
to Poland walking.
And, you know, all the
bridges were blown up,
and all the roads were--
it took us-- let's see now,
we were liberated on the 9th,
and it took us, I would
say, a good two weeks
to get back to Krakow.
INT: This was the
9th of May, 1945?
CB: '45, Mm-hm.
INT: Before you get back to
Krakow, let me just ask you--
did you see Schindler
leave the camp?
CB: No I did not, no.
I understand he left at night.
There were some people
who did accompany him,
and some people who
did see him leave,
but I was not one of them.
No.
INT: So after leaving the camp,
how did you get back to Krakow?
CB: We walked, primarily.
We walked, or we hitched some
rides or with-- on carts,
if people would take us.
The Czechs were incredibly
kind people, the kindest people
I've met, really.
They were wonderful.
They really extended themselves.
They shared whatever
they had with us.
Really good people.
So, you know, by
walking and by hiking
and by hitchhiking, and
doing all of those things,
we finally got back to Krakow.
INT: Who were you
with at the time?
CB: My mother and my
father, the three of us,
because we met in the last camp.
INT: And how old were
you at this time?
CB: I was 13, almost
14, because my birthday
was on the 28th of May.
INT: So what do you remember
about going back to Krakow?
CB: I remember--
I remember that we
weren't welcomed.
Here we thought we
had survived the war,
and we would be,
you know, welcomed,
but we weren't at all.
If there was any--
you know, that's when I
really felt anti-Semitism.
We were really told, you know,
we shouldn't have survived,
Hitler didn't do enough.
You felt like you didn't
want to stay there
for a very long time.
On the 28th of May,
it was my birthday,
and the only thing I wanted
was to go to a movie.
So my mother arranged for
me to go to the movie--
but I didn't have any clothes.
We were staying
with some people,
and I borrowed a skirt
and a top from this lady.
But the skirt-- I had to wind
like three times around me.
I had weighed 65 pounds, and
I was as tall as I am now.
So I was pretty skinny.
Yeah, 35 kilos--
70 pounds, yeah.
But I had-- you know,
I went to the movies.
I remember to this day what
I saw, it was Deanna Durbin.
And it was some sort of
a show called, in Polish,
[SPEAKING POLISH].
I mean, it was some sort of a
school for girls-- you know,
adolescent girls.
And I was-- to me it
was absolutely charming,
and she had a beautiful voice,
and she was singing in it.
But shock of shocks, I saw
myself for the first time
in a full-length mirror.
I couldn't believe
what I saw, you know.
I mean, my hair had just
started growing out,
and I was skinny as
anything, and I looked awful.
You know, like a
skeleton, practically.
So that's how I
remember my birthday.
Anyway, I also realized
that I didn't know anything.
I had-- I didn't
know how to write.
I knew how to read, because
one of the things I forgot
to tell you was that in
Plaszow, they brought books
from all over to burn them.
And the women who were in
charge of burning the books
used to steal them--
under penalty of death--
hide them on them, bring
them back to the barracks,
and pass them around to
read at night, you know.
And we would just--
so we read, you know,
by the night light.
I knew how to read, but I
didn't know how to write.
And I had lost--
you know, I was 14, and I
only had two years of school.
So the important thing
was to get caught up.
So I started learning
as quickly as possible.
My parents got me a tutor,
and I tried to cram in as much
as possible.
INT: Was this in Krakow?
CB: That was in Krakow.
We got there, as I said, in May.
And I had the
summer to do it in,
because I was trying to make
it into school in September.
And I took the exams, and I
made it into the gymnasium.
I made up six years of
school in one summer,
and made it into-- there
was only two Jewish girls
were accepted.
I was one of them.
However, in September, there
was another pogrom in Poland.
And it was at that point
that my parents decided--
we-- well, they
went back, really,
to see if there was anybody
left from the family.
And since there was nobody
left from the family
that we knew of, they let my
uncle know, in Israel, and also
my uncle in the United
States, that we survived.
And my parents decided Poland
was not the place to stay.
And I was in school for about
four weeks, just September.
And in October, we smuggled
over the border, out of Poland.
And already at that point,
Poland was closing its borders.
And we smuggled in a Russian
truck into Bratislava.
And from Bratislava, we
made our way into Prague--
back to Czechoslovakia.
And from Prague, we went--
we waited there for
about a week and a half,
and then we were taken
over the border--
the German-Czech border.
In the middle of the
night, we walked across.
We missed the-- we made
it through the Czech,
but didn't quite make it behind
the border of the Americans,
but they let us in.
And we made it into
Hof, and from Hof
into Landsberg, the
displaced persons camp,
where we stayed
for a little while.
And then into
Mindelheim, where we
stayed for a year and a half,
and then the United States.
INT: Let me stop you right here.
We're going to change
the tape and we'll
talk a little bit
more about this.
CB: OK.
INT: --25, 1996 in
Camarillo, California.
Mrs. Biniaz, when
we left off, you
were telling us how you
traveled through Germany
to come to the United States.
But let's back up a little bit.
And why don't you tell us what
it was like at the DP camp
when you got there.
CB: Well, there
were people from all
over who had no way of going
back to their countries.
And again, we lived in
barracks and buildings.
Lots of people got married,
you know, and some of them
actually started
on having babies.
But we had lived in camp so many
years that my parents decided
this was not the
way to live anymore
and started to look
on the outside.
Went to a place called
Mindelheim a small community
in Schwabenland.
It's on the way
to Memmingen. It's
between Munich and Memmingen,
or Augsburg and Memmingen,
the home of the river Mindel.
It's very charming, very small.
They were able to find
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]
an apartment--
a requisition-- a room,
really, from a woman
whose husband was perished
in the war, but was a Nazi.
It was-- wasn't really
fair, in retrospect,
to do this to somebody.
I mean, she had
nothing to do with it.
But that's the way
it was after the war.
But we lived in her apartment.
She was actually the
caretaker of the bank,
and we lived upstairs.
It was an attic apartment.
It wasn't very much, really.
But it was a better place
than living in a camp.
And we went on
German ration cards,
so we didn't even get
anything from the camp.
We did get packages
from UNRRA once
in a while, which was wonderful
to get that piece of chocolate,
and piece of soap.
And in the meantime,
we had contacted
my uncle in the United States,
and my uncle in Israel.
And they were both
working feverishly
to send us affidavits
to come out.
But it took a year
and a half for us.
But that was my--
that was my return
to normalcy, really.
And I'm very grateful for having
lived for a year and a half
in that German town,
because it just
made me work my way through
hate, anger, and all of that.
And I left feeling
pretty good, you know?
INT: When you first
arrived there,
did you feel a lot
of hate and anger?
CB: Oh yes, of course.
I mean, I had been
deprived of my childhood,
you know, and really,
my teenage years.
By the time I came to the
United States, I was 16.
So in essence, from
eight to 16 was gone.
But I had a very good
experience in Mindelheim.
Just by chance, I worked--
I went to a convent.
And there was an
elderly nun there.
She was 92 years old,
and I was 14 and a half.
And she was going to teach
me English and German,
because I didn't
know any at the time.
She had been a cloistered nun.
This was a semi-cloistered
establishment in the sense
that the nuns didn't go
out, but the public came in.
It was a school for girls.
She had entered the convent--
it was called the
English Institute.
The mother house was in London.
She had entered the
convent at the age
of 16 because of a broken love
affair and had never left it.
She did not know what it was
like on the outside, really.
She accepted me totally for
what I was, which was wonderful,
you know?
And she was very kind.
It's the only time I cry,
when I think about her.
She was good, good human being.
[PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I had
a good relationship with her
for two years--
I mean, year and a half.
And then, we corresponded in the
United States when I came here.
She died at the age of 94.
I have her letters.
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]
Those were good Germans.
Not everybody was bad.
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I
think living in Germany
taught me one thing, that
evil can happen anywhere,
with any human being,
if you give it a chance.
[PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] OK.
INT: What do you remember about
coming to the United States?
CB: We arrived in New York
after 11 days on the boat.
And we came on a troop ship.
We were 60 women in
one of the cabins,
you know, slept five to a bunk
because it was a troop ship.
Everybody was seasick except me,
so I ate everybody's ice cream
and enjoyed it tremendously.
We arrived in New York.
My uncle came from
Des Moines and met us
with his brand new car.
It was one of the new
Cadillacs that just came off
the assembly line in 1947.
We stayed in New
York for a few days.
It was exhilarating.
New York was very
exciting at the time,
you know, Broadway, and lights,
and the neon lights everywhere.
It was just beautiful.
And he drove us, then,
from New York to Iowa,
which was very nice.
Get to see part of the
country, you know, that way.
We didn't stay very
long in New York.
We stayed about
three and a half--
maybe three or four days.
That's all.
Yeah
INT: So when you began your new
life in Iowa, what did you do?
Did you become a student again?
Did you work?
CB: Right away.
As a matter of fact,
I-- right away,
as soon as we got
to Des Moines--
it was in the summer--
I signed up for summer school.
I presented my book.
I had been tutored in Germany.
I you know-- my English nun
taught me English and German,
but I also was tutored
in mathematics and Latin
and took violin lessons.
And fortunately, I brought
all my notebooks with me.
And I submitted them
to the high school,
and they looked them over.
And they said that I had
covered enough material
to enter the 12th grade.
However, I did need
the requirement
of American history, which
is an 11th grade subject.
So I went into summer school
to do American history,
to one of the high
schools in Des Moines.
And then, in September, I
entered North High School
and graduated in
end of May 1948.
INT: Did your Holocaust
experience affect you at all
in the way you interacted
with other American children
when you arrived here?
CB: Oh, I'm sure I did.
First of all, it was very
hard for me to talk about it.
Secondly, when I got--
I got-- I was very fortunate
to have been able to go
to college, to Grinnell
College, which is a very nice,
private school in Iowa--
a very fine private school.
And I think that I was just
old beyond my years, you know?
I worked very hard.
I was on a
scholarship, but I had
to support myself
for board and room
by doing all kinds of jobs.
And the thing that
bothered me most
is that the young
people who were
there who were given
the education really
didn't appreciate it.
But there was a function of the
fact that I had gone through
things that they hadn't.
And it took me about three years
to finding-- by my senior year,
we were on a par.
[LAUGHS] You know, they had
matured, and I had leveled off.
So I think I enjoyed my
senior year the most.
But th-- you know,
it was difficult
for me to accept the fact that
they did not appreciate what,
what they were given, you know?
INT: Were you able to talk
about your experiences
in the Holocaust to anyone?
CB: Not really.
Not really.
I mean, it was--
it's very difficult--
it was very difficult to
talk about it, because nobody
could comprehend it.
And I think that's why I said
Schindler's List, the film,
it sort of opened up the
floodgates, because now
people who see it are
able to ask questions,
or at least comprehend
one's experience.
INT: So after graduating
college, what did you do?
CB: Well, I got
another fellowship.
Well, I spent some-- one
summer at Northhampton School
of Social Work--
I mean at the Smith School of
Social Work in Northampton.
And then I was fortunate.
I had gotten a fellowship
to Columbia University.
There were two of us who
won $10,000 scholarship
for further study out of
something like 245 applicants.
So that was quite a
feather in our cap.
And I ended up at Columbia.
And I got my master's
there in education,
and lived at the
international house-- met
my husband that way.
INT: And what's
your husband's name?
CB: Amir.
And we got married in 1953.
And then I continued.
Oh, I had, you
know, beyond that--
I went-- you know,
after that, we settled,
and I continued my
education at the schools.
And I ended up teaching
for about 25 years.
INT: At what level?
CB: I taught elementary school,
and I worked with youngsters
who had learning difficulties.
I felt that was the
right thing to do.
I enjoyed it, too, very much.
It was very gratifying.
INT: And then you had
a family of your own?
CB: Yes, two children.
INT: And their names?
CB: Robert is my son.
And he's married to Lucy and
has a little girl named Rachel.
She's four years old.
And then I have a
daughter, Susan.
And she's married to Bob.
And they have a little boy named
Alex, Alexander and another one
on the way.
INT: Who's going
to have the baby?
CB: Susan.
INT: Your daughter.
CB: My daughter, in March.
INT: Tell me something.
Do you feel that your Holocaust
experience influenced you
in the way you raised
your own children?
CB: Yes it did.
INT: In what way?
CB: Very much so.
I didn't talk to them about it
till they-- till my son was 12
and my daughter was 8.
They had absolutely no idea
that I had been a camp survivor
or had--
I didn't want them to have--
I didn't want them
to feel guilty.
I wanted them to have
a happy childhood.
I know other people talk
about it all the time.
And, you know, different people
experience it differently.
That was my way.
I didn't want my
children to hate.
And I think I achieved that.
My daughter has been able
to go to Germany many times,
and has friends in Germany,
has studied in Germany.
And has not-- doesn't have the--
didn't go there with,
with baggage, you know?
She was able to meet people
and form her own opinions, not
my opinions.
And I think, you know--
I think my living in
Germany did that for me.
I think if I had come straight
from camp someplace else,
I might have never been
able to work through this.
But I did work through it,
and that was good for me.
INT: Did you ever
have an occasion
to see Oskar Schindler
after the war?
CB: I didn't, but
my parents did.
They met up with him
on a street in Munich
just when we were waiting to--
for our shipment--
I mean, to Bremerhaven to
go to the United States.
And from what I understand,
they chatted on the street.
And he told them he was
particularly happy that we were
going to the United States.
I think if we had
lived in New York area,
we might have met up with him.
But because my parents
lived in Iowa--
and he did come to
New York many times.
And he did visit friends
of my parents, good friends
of my parents--
the [? Rosners. ?]
And had my parents
lived in New York area,
they probably would
have met up with him.
But Iowa was kind of far away.
INT: Now that it's over
50 years after the war,
is there any message
that you would
like to leave for
future generations
for your own children
and grandchildren?
Ah.
Don't hate.
Try to live with your neighbor.
Accept people for what they are.
Everybody has
something to offer.
Nobody's better
than anybody else.
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I
mean, those are my feelings.
Try to see the good in people.
Whether they can achieve
it, I don't know.
But you know, that's,
that's the way.
I mean, I hate to see what's
happening in places like Bosnia
and Herzegovina, where you
have ethnic cleansing again,
the same things
over and over again,
the hatred that
goes on in Israel.
I mean, these are
all human beings.
They all eat the same way,
drink the same way, you know?
They bleed the same way.
So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]
that's my message.
INT: Thank you very much.
CB: Thank you.
INT: We appreciate
your taking the time
to give us your testimony today.
And now we'd like to meet the
other members of your family
who are here, and look
at some of your pictures.
CB: OK.
INT: Mrs. Biniaz, would
you please introduce
your lovely family to us?
CB: I'll be delighted to.
This is my mother, Phyllis
Karp, who is visiting here
from Des Moines, Iowa.
She's been here-- she
wants me to tell you--
six weeks visiting in Camarillo.
And this is my husband,
[? Bini. ?] We call him
[? Bini ?] for short, but
actually his name is Amir,
and he lives here.
[LAUGHTER]
INT: I hope so.
Mrs. Karp, why don't
we start with you.
Would you tell
me, please, do you
think that your experience
in the Holocaust
influenced you in the way
you raised your daughter?
PHYLLIS KARP: You mean
after, after the war?
Well, not really.
We raised her the
way, you know--
we thought we did
the best, you know?
But not influenced
by the Holocaust, no.
We were very happy and
lucky to have her, you know?
And we couldn't do enough.
I mean, we didn't do so much.
She did it all by herself.
It's the truth.
She was our pride and joy.
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]
I always say,
we didn't have the quantity,
but we had the quality.
CB: Aw.
This is embarrassing.
INT: This is a wonderful thing.
PHYLLIS KARP: No it is not.
It's the truth.
Your father was so pr--
he was so proud of
her, always talking
about her accomplishments,
Phi Beta Kappa.
I showed off because we had it
framed in our second bedroom.
And every time he was
proud-- if somebody
came to visit us, you
know, to show how proud,
how smart his daughter is.
INT: And Bini--
AMIR BINIAZ: That's me.
INT: Why don't you tell us a few
things about your lovely wife.
What have you got to
add to this testimony?
AMIR BINIAZ: I think my
mother-in-law was very eloquent
about it.
I think Celina is probably
one of the smartest
ladies I've, I've known-- one
of the smartest people I know.
And she's a great mother.
She's very caring.
She's a caregiver.
And I'm, just as equally
as my mother-in-law,
proud to have her in the family.
INT: And how long have
you been married now?
AMIR BINIAZ: I think you'd
better help me with that.
[LAUGHTER]
CB: 42 Years.
INT: Thank you very much.
We appreciate your taking
the time to be with us today.
PHYLLIS KARP: May
I add something?
INT: Yes, please.
PHYLLIS KARP: You
know, my husband
was sick for awhile,
two and a half years.
And she was just wonderful--
leaving her husband alone
here, and coming to Des Moines
to stay to help me out.
You know, it's something--
you cannot buy it.
CB: That's what every
daughter should do.
PHYLLIS KARP: But they don't.
CB: Well--
PHYLLIS KARP: You are--
you're exceptional.
It's true.
INT: Well thank you very much.
We appreciate your time.
And now we're going to take a
look at some of your pictures.
CB: OK.
This is a picture of my mother,
Phyllis, and myself as a baby.
It was taken in 1931
in Krakow, in Poland.
I must be about--
probably five or six
months old on that picture.
INT: Where did you
get this picture from?
CB: Well, it was probably
sent to one of our relatives,
either in the United
States or in Israel,
because we had none
of the pictures left.
Whatever pictures we
see today are pictures
that have been preserved
by family members,
and then given to
us after the war.
That is a picture of
my mother and myself.
I am about two years old
there-- less probably,
a year and a half or two--
on a street in Krakow, Poland,
probably taken in 1933.
INT: And give us the
name of your mother
and yourself again, please.
CB: My name is Celina.
And my mother's name in Poland
was Felicia, Fela, Felicia.
And we went by the name of Karp.
That is a picture of me, Celina,
on my first day of school,
dressed in a uniform.
I am six years
old, and I'm going
to the public school called
Adam Mickiewicz, named
for the Polish poet.
It is taken in the courtyard
of our apartment building
at 22 [POLISH] in
Krakow, Poland.
And the year would have
to be, then, 1937--
September of 1937.
This picture was taken
on the ship, SS Marl--
Marlin.
And it is taking
us from Bremerhaven
to the United States.
It is my birthday,
28th of May, 1947.
On the left hand side is
my mother, Phyllis Karp,
or at that time,
still Felicia Karp.
Right next to her is a picture
of myself, Celina Karp.
I don't know who the other two
people are on the right hand
side.
But looking through the opening
on the right hand side, where
the people are standing,
to the very back there,
you see Europe disappearing
on the horizon.
We were just leaving on
the ship from Bremerhaven.
This is my concentration
camp number, 76318.
The KZ stands for
Konzentrationslager Auschwitz.
Since we were the
300 women who did not
get tattooed in Auschwitz,
we received these numbers
to wear on our uniforms.
INT: What does the red
triangle stand for?
Do you know?
CB: Jew.
INT: That's how they
designated the Jews,
with the red triangle?
CB: Either with a star of
David, a yellow Star of David,
or the red triangle.
Actually, the red triangle
also meant prisoner, you know?
In 1948, I attended
the Encampment
for Citizenship, which was
sponsored by the Ethical
Culture Society of New York.
The encampment took
place at Fieldston School
in New York City.
Mrs. Roosevelt, Mrs.
Eleanor Roosevelt,
was a sponsor of the encampment,
and we would go to her estate
in Hyde Park for a
picnic on the lawn.
I took this picture of her
while she was talking to us
with a little Brownie camera.
She was a wonderful lady, as
you can see that in her face,
and in her smile.
She was very interested
in the young people,
and in the experiment
in living together
of various races and religions.
This is a picture of me, Celina.
I'm 16 years old.
This is 1947, in July--
my first summer in
the United States.
This picture was taken
at my uncle's house
in Des Moines, Iowa.
I was a teenager.
[LAUGHS]
In 1993, the film
Schindler's List
was produced and
opened to various--
in various theaters.
This is a picture of my mother,
Phyllis Karp, my father,
Irvin Karp.
And the little pot my
mother is holding--
the little red pot--
is the pot we received
at Schindler's factory
from which we drank
our hot liquids.
My mother has kept it all these
years as a reminder of what
it was like to be in a camp.
INT: Where was
this picture taken?
CB: The picture was taken in by
the Des Moines Register people
in Des Moines, Iowa, in 1993.
This picture was taken
in 1989 at Yad Vashem
on the Allee of the Righteous
in front of Schindler's tree.
On the right hand side is
my mother, Phyllis Karp.
Next to her is my
father, Irvin Karp.
And I am on the left,
Celina Karp Biniaz.
OK.
This picture was taken at 1582
Calle Aurora in Camarillo,
California on December 1994.
And the people in the picture
are, on the left, myself.
Next to me is my
son-in-law, Bob Harris,
holding up my grandson,
Alexander Biniaz Harris.
Next to Alexander is my
daughter, Susan Biniaz.
Below is my husband,
Amir Biniaz.
Next to him is my granddaughter,
Rachel Hood Biniaz Next to her
is her mother, Lucy Hood.
And next to her is
my son, Robert Biniaz
We're a happy family.
Since I'm a survivor
of Schindler's List,
I was invited to the
preview of the film.
My husband took this picture
in front of the poster
advertising Schindler's List.
This was the first
time I saw the film.
I was incredibly moved by it,
as was the entire theater.
There wasn't a sound
emanating from anybody even
after the end of the film,
except some people were crying.
I think the film was
exceptionally well done.
I think Mr. Spielberg did
an excellent job with a very
difficult
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] job--
a very difficult topic.
[PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS]
And I think
he sort of opened up people's
eyes and ears to what
was happening at
the time, and has
made it possible
for a lot of people
that come forth and speak
about their experiences.
I know I did not speak about my
experiences for over 45 years.
And it was only after
the Schindler's List film
was shown to people that I
started talking about it.
So I think even for me, Mr.
Spielberg made it happen.
And I hope he's made it
happen for a lot of people.
Thank you.
INT: Thank you very much.